---
title: "An Indian Summer: The Super League"
date: 2014-08-27 00:00 UTC
category: General
thumb: indian-league.jpg
tags:
---

> Even though I am retired, the opportunity to play in India is really exciting. I am keen to share my knowledge and experience of the Premier League.
> <footer><cite>Freddie Ljungberg</cite></footer>

READMORE

It’s easy, even churlish to associate India with mystery and glamour, exoticism and pomp. A nation boasting over 1.2 billion people and the Taj Mahal, nuclear weapons and the most regal of cuisines. The stereotyped wonder of its mysteries laid out in *Slumdog Millionaire* and *Shantaram*, the lavish lifestyle of Bollywood actors and the religious fervor that surrounds them, unmatched by their A-list Hollywood counterparts. India is magnetic, and has always drawn crowds of people from all over the world in an almost typical and cheesy fashion. 

It is mildly surprising that it took until 2010 for Indian sport to cash in on the concept of football; in a country dominated by cricket, the local I-League was relegated far into the background. At a time where American Soccer was enjoying some serious air-time thanks to messrs Beckham, Henry, Keane and Cahill, and Chinese clubs recruited the odd foreign footballer every now and then, India had much to do in order to catch up with the other world powers.

Enter Reliance Industries, the aptly-named benevolent behemoth whose hand dabbles in everything from retail and communications to petrochemicals and refining. A deal brokered between Reliance Industries and the All India Football Federation saw a [15-year deal](http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/sports/football/top-stories/AIFF-signs-700-crore-deal-with-IMG-RIL/articleshow/7072492.cms?referral=PM) emerge for the “promotion and development of football”. The agreement stipulates the granting of all commercial rights to Reliance Industries, alongside branding and marketing together with a general restructuring of domestic competitions. A much needed boost for Indian football, a financial lifeline from a ‘trusted’ Indian brand along with a convenient 2 million dollars courtesy of FIFA. 

Franchising; the new sports fad of the 21st century. After an embarrassing failure to create a franchise league in West Bengal, a new league encompassing all of India was announced for debut in 2014, mirroring the already existing cricket Indian Premier League. The format simple, the stage set: 8 franchise teams would compete in a single league for the top spot, with local and international players admitted to teams via a draft, and no promotion/relegation. Everyone’s a winner, except maybe the last player to be drafted. In line with promoting the sport, each club is responsible for its own grassroots campaign, compulsory if the game is going to have any long-term future. STAR Sports was responsible for the telecast, slated to begin in October 2014. 

Similar to American sports, cities bid for a right to participate in what was fast becoming the most prestigious league in Indian football before a single ball was kicked. Interested business corporations, actors, and other European clubs all watched on as the bidding began, with the cities of Chennai, Delhi, Goa, Kolkata, Guwahati, Kochi, Mumbai and Pune emerging victorious. Businesses, sportsmen, actors and clubs moved in, as the bidding for club franchise came next. Former Indian cricket captain Sachin Tendulkar together with PVP Ventures claimed the Kochi club. Sourav Ganguly teamed up with surprise package Atletico Madrid, sniffing a business opportunity, to win the bid for Kolkata. Indian superstars John Abraham, Salman Khan and Ranbir Kapoor swooped in for Guwahati, Pune and Mumbai. The league was completed by Goa, won over by football clubs Dempo and Salgaocar together with the MNC Videocon, while Bangalore and Delhi were snapped up by less glamourous parties. 

The narrative writes itself at this point. Glamour and stardom was the theme, with name-dropping the norm since the inception of the league. Taking precedent from David Beckham and the MLS, marquee signings were announced with the first being former Manchester United hitman Louis Saha. Atleti branded their franchise with the part-cool part-comical name of Atletico de Kolkata and subsequently brought in Champions League winner Luis Garcia. A host of other names followed, including retired Invincibles Robert Pires and Freddie Ljungberg, France champion David Trezeguet, Joan Capdevila and rounded off by former England keeper David James. The league was geared as a spectacle, a proper marketing campaign aiming to pull Indian football out of limbo. The superstar effect was in full swing, if only a handful of once greats. 

So how will this end, how will this story play out? The league has been postponed three times before settling on its current date. Despite the ‘marquee’ additions, they lack a current world star, or a reputed player below the age of 32. There is a fear among the existing football clubs in India that this corporatisation of the sport in the name of marketing and development will cannibalise instead, with Valanka Ameleo, CEO of current India League champions Churchill Brothers vehemently opposing. "I have been saying all along that the interest from corporates in (Indian) football is good. But can anyone tell me why are they not tying up with existing clubs, rather than float these ridiculous idea of a super league. This is such a weak-structured tournament that it's bound to fail”. Citing a money-driven plan without the incentive of a promotion-relegation system is doomed to failure, and other established clubs echo this sentiment, but for all their concerns going against the might of the AIFF and Reliance Industries is more than a mammoth task. 

Could it be all the pomp and pageantry we lazily associate with India and the East? Is this a genuine opportunity to promote football in the country, or are we guilty of embellishing the scenario with a splash of orientalism? As easy as it is to see the Indian Super League with romantic notions, it’s equally easy to look through the lens of cynicism and see a money-grabbing opportunity. “It's going to kill a sleeping giant without allowing it a chance to wake up and get out of bed. Some retired foreign players will probably laugh their way to the bank but without a strong youth developmental base, Indian football will crumble,” says Valanka, a pretty damning assessment as any you will hear. Hopefully the Super League can go the way of its American counterparts, instead of providing the footnotes to another failed attempt at elevating Asian football. 
